[FLINK-12508] Expand Testing Documentation (#8437)
apache/flink: docs/dev/stream/testing.md

under the License.
-->

Testing is an integral part of every software development process. As such Apache Flink comes with tooling to test your Apache Flink application code on different levels of the testing pyramid.

* This will be replaced by the TOC
{:toc}

## Testing User-Defined Functions

> Usually, one can assume that Flink produces correct results outside of a user-defined function. Therefore, it is recommended to test these classes that contain the main business logic with unit tests as much as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usually, one can assume that Flink produces correct results outside of a user-defined function. Therefore, it is recommended to test those classes that contain the main business logic with unit tests as much as possible.
```

### Unit Testing Stateless, Timeless UDFs

For example, let's take the following stateless `MapFunction`.

<div class="codetabs" markdown="1">
<div data-lang="java" markdown="1">
{% highlight java %}
public class IncrementMapFunction implements MapFunction<Long, Long> {

    @Override
    public Long map(Long record) throws Exception {
        return record +1 ;
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}
</div>

<div data-lang="scala" markdown="1">
{% highlight scala %}
class IncrementMapFunction extends MapFunction[Long, Long] {

>     override def map(record: java.lang.Long): java.lang.Long = {

Reviewer: Scala has its own primitive types that auto coerces to the correct java boxed or unboxed primitive. 

```suggestion
    override def map(record: Long): Long = {
```

public class IncrementFlatMapFunctionTest {

    @Test
    public void testIncrement() throws Exception {
        // instantiate your function
        IncrementFlatMapFunction incrementer = new IncrementFlatMapFunction();

        Collector<Integer> collector = mock(Collector.class);

        // call the methods that you have implemented
        incrementer.flatMap(2L, collector)

        //verify collector was called with the right output
        Mockito.verify(collector, times(1)).collect(3L);
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}
</div>

<div data-lang="scala" markdown="1">
{% highlight scala %}
class IncrementFlatMapFunctionTest extends FlatSpec with MockFactory {

    "IncrementFlatMapFunction" should "increment values" in {
       // instantiate your function
      val incrementer : IncrementFlatMapFunction = new IncrementFlatMapFunction()

      val collector = mock[Collector[Integer]]

      //verify collector was called with the right output
      (collector.collect _).expects(3)

      // call the methods that you have implemented
      flattenFunction.flatMap(2, collector)
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}
</div>
</div>

### Unit Testing Stateful or Timely UDFs & Custom Operators

> Testing the functionality of a user-defined function, which makes use of managed state and/or timers is more difficult, because it involves testing the interaction between the user code and Flink's runtime.

Reviewer: Unnecessary comma. 
```suggestion
Testing the functionality of a user-defined function, which makes use of managed state or timers is more difficult because it involves testing the interaction between the user code and Flink's runtime.
```

<div data-lang="java" markdown="1">
{% highlight java %}

public class StatefulFlatMapTest {
    private OneInputStreamOperatorTestHarness<Long, Long> testHarness;
    private StatefulFlatMap statefulFlatMapFunction;

    @Before
    public void setupTestHarness() throws Exception {

        //instantiate user-defined function
        statefulFlatMapFunction = new StatefulFlatMapFunction();

        // wrap user defined function into a the corresponding operator
        testHarness = new OneInputStreamOperatorTestHarness<>(new StreamFlatMap<>(statefulFlatMapFunction));

        // optionally configured the execution environment
        testHarness.getExecutionConfig().setAutoWatermarkInterval(50);

        // open the test harness (will also call open() on RichFunctions)
        testHarness.open();
    }

    @Test
    public void testingStatefulFlatMapFunction() throws Exception {

        //push (timestamped) elements into the operator (and hence user defined function)
        testHarness.processElement(2L, 100L);

        //trigger event time timers by advancing the event time of the operator with a watermark
        testHarness.processWatermark(100L);

>         //trigger proccesign time timers by advancing the processing time of the operator directly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        //trigger processing time timers by advancing the processing time of the operator directly
```

    testHarness = new KeyedOneInputStreamOperatorTestHarness(new StreamFlatMap(statefulFlatMapFunction),new MyStringKeySelector(), Types.STRING())

    // open the test harness (will also call open() on RichFunctions)
    testHarness.open();
  }

  //tests

}
{% endhighlight %}
</div>
</div>

Many more examples for the usage of these test harnesses can be found in the Flink code base, e.g.:

* `org.apache.flink.streaming.runtime.operators.windowing.WindowOperatorTest` is a good example for testing operators and user-defined functions, which depend on processing or event time.
* `org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.sink.filesystem.LocalStreamingFileSinkTest` shows how to test a custom sink with the `AbstractStreamOperatorTestHarness`. Specifically, it uses `AbstractStreamOperatorTestHarness.snapshot` and `AbstractStreamOperatorTestHarness.initializeState` to tests its interaction with Flink's checkpointing mechanism.

<span class="label label-info">Note</span> Be aware that `AbstractStreamOperatorTestHarness` and its derived classes are currently not part of the public API and can be subject to change.

## Testing Flink Jobs

### JUnit Rule `MiniClusterWithClientResource`

> In order to test complete Flink jobs, you can write integration tests that are executed against a local, embedded Flink mini cluster. For this, Flink provides a JUnit rule

Reviewer: This sentence sounds off to me, how about: 

```suggestion
Apache Flink provides a JUnit rule called `MiniClusterWithClientResource` for testing complete jobs against a local, embedded mini cluster.
```

called `MiniClusterWithClientResource`.

To use `MiniClusterWithClientResource` one additional dependency (test scoped) is needed.

{% highlight xml %}
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>
  <artifactId>flink-test-utils{{ site.scala_version_suffix }}</artifactId>
  <version>{{site.version }}</version>
</dependency>
{% endhighlight %}

Let us take the same simple `MapFunction` as in the previous sections.

<div class="codetabs" markdown="1">
<div data-lang="java" markdown="1">
{% highlight java %}
public class IncrementMapFunction implements MapFunction<Long, Long> {

    @Override
    public Long map(Long record) throws Exception {
        return record +1 ;
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}
</div>

<div data-lang="scala" markdown="1">
{% highlight scala %}
class IncrementMapFunction extends MapFunction[Long, Long] {

>     override def map(record: java.lang.Long): java.lang.Long = {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    override def map(record: Long): Long = {
```

    CollectSink.values.clear()

    // create a stream of custom elements and apply transformations
    env.fromElements(1, 21, 22)
       .map(new IncrementMapFunction())
       .addSink(new CollectSink())

    // execute
    env.execute()

    // verify your results
    CollectSink.values should contain allOf (1,22,23)
    }
}
// create a testing sink
class CollectSink extends SinkFunction[Long] {

  override def invoke(value: Long): Unit = {
    synchronized {
      CollectSink.values.add(value)
    }
  }
}

object CollectSink {
    // must be static
    val values: util.List[Long] = new util.ArrayList()
}
{% endhighlight %}
</div>
</div>

A few remarks on integration testing with `MiniClusterWithClientResource`:

* In order not to copy your whole pipeline code from production to test, make sources and sinks pluggable in your production code and inject special test sources and test sinks in your tests.

* The static variable in `CollectSink` is used here because Flink serializes all operators before distributing them across a cluster.
Communicating with operators instantiated by a local Flink mini cluster via static variables is one way around this issue.

> Alternatively, you could for example write the data to files in a temporary directory with your test sink.

Reviewer: Unneccessary 
```suggestion
Alternatively, you could write the data to files in a temporary directory with your test sink.
```

> * You can also implement your own custom *parallel* source function for emitting watermarks.

Reviewer: I feel like "also" implies the previous sentence was also about managing watermarks.
```suggestion
* You can implement a custom *parallel* source function for emitting watermarks if your job uses event timer timers.
```

> * It is recommended to always test your pipelines locally with a parallelism > 1 in order to identify bugs which only surface, when the pipelines is executed in parallel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* It is recommended to always test your pipelines locally with a parallelism > 1 to identify bugs which only surface for the pipelines executed in parallel.
```

> * If you use `@Rule` instead of `@ClassRule` a new local Flink cluster will be brought up for each individual test method increasing the overall execution time of your tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Prefer `@ClassRule` over `@Rule` so that multiple tests can share the same Flink cluster. Doing so saves a significant amount of time since the startup and shutdown of Flink clusters usually dominate the execution time of the actual tests.
```

> * You can also enable checkpointing and restarts in your integration tests to test recovery locally. For this you need to trigger a failure, which can be easily done by throwing an exception from (a test-only) user-defined function in your pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If your pipeline contains custom state handling, you can test its correctness by enabling checkpointing and restarting the job within the mini cluster. For this, you need to trigger a failure by throwing an exception from (a test-only) user-defined function in your pipeline.
```
